docs: add first iteration of analysis documentation (#2167)
keptn/lifecycle-toolkit: docs/content/en/docs/implementing/slo/_index.md

---

> title: Analisis

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Analysis
```

> description: Understand Analysis in Keptn and how to use them

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Understand Analyses in Keptn and how to use them
```

> weight: 150

Reviewer: Is this where it logically belongs in the "User Guides" section -- after "Restart an application" and before "Evaluations"?  This seems odd...

Author: I am open to suggestions, I just copied it from an other file 😸

Reviewer: Okay, cool.  I'll deal with this after this PR is merged.

Reviewer 2: Why not put it into the correct place right away?

Author: yeah so where should we put it?

Reviewer 2: i suggest to put it after “working with keptn tasks”
and i would change the title from “Analysis” to “Define SLOs/SLIs with Analyses” or somehting like that. more a usecase title that just what it is

cascade:
  type: docs
  currentversion: main
---

The Keptn Metrics Operator implements an SLO/SLI feature set inspired by Keptn v1 under the name of Analysis.

> With an Analysis Definition you can specify multiple Service Level Objectives that will be evaluated in your Analysis.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With an Analysis Definition you can specify multiple Service Level Objectives that will be evaluated in your Analysis.
```

> At the end of the Analysis the status will return whether your objective failed or passed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the end of the Analysis the status returns whether your objective failed or passed.
```

> At the end of the Analysis the status will return whether your objective failed or passed.

Reviewer: I'd like to do a little better description here -- maybe pull in some text from "Quality Gates" like "allows you to validate a deployment or release using data provided by your observability platform and using quality criteria that you define as Service Level Objectives (SLOs)". But maybe we should just get this much merged and then I can go in and finesse the description a bit?

Author: Yes, also the analysis described here works without the need for the rest of the lifecycle controller, but maybe we could as well have some reflection on how to integrate it with evaluations... for sure let's do it after

Reviewer: Agreed!

> This data can be seen as Prometheus metrics and can be displayed on Grafana.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Analysis result is exposed as an OpenTelemetry metric and can be displayed on dashboard tools, such as Grafana.
```

Keptn v1 users may use [SLO](https://github.com/keptn/lifecycle-toolkit/blob/main/metrics-operator/converter/slo_converter.md#slo-converter) and [SLI converters](https://github.com/keptn/lifecycle-toolkit/blob/main/metrics-operator/converter/sli_converter.md#sli-converter) to migrate towards Keptn Analysis. 

## Keptn Analysis basics

A Keptn Analysis is implemented with three resources:

* [Analysis](https://lifecycle.keptn.sh/docs/crd-ref/metrics/v1alpha3/#analysis) --
  define the specific configurations and the analysis to report
* [AnalysisDefinition](https://lifecycle.keptn.sh/docs/crd-ref/metrics/v1alpha3/#analysisdefinition) --
  define the list of SLOs for an analysis
* [AnalysisValueTemplate](https://lifecycle.keptn.sh/docs/crd-ref/metrics/v1alpha3/#analysisvaluetemplate) --

>   define the SLI: the KeptnMetricsProvider and the Query to perform for each SLO

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  define the SLI: the KeptnMetricsProvider and the Query to perform for each SLI
```

### Define Analysis, Analysis Definition and AnalysisValueTemplate

An Analysis customizes the templates defined inside an AnalysisDefinition by adding configurations such as:
* a Timeframe that specifies the range for the corresponding query in the AnalysisValueTemplate
* a map of key/value pairs that can be used to substitute placeholders in the AnalysisValueTemplate

An AnalysisDefinition contains a list of objectives to satisfy.
Each of these objectives:
* specifies failure or warning target criteria,
* specifies whether the objective is a key objective (its failure would fail the analysis)
* indicates the weight of the objective on the overall analysis
* refers to an AnalysisValueTemplate that contains the SLIs, so from what provider to gather the data and how to compute the analysis

In each AnalysisValueTemplate we store the query for the analysis of the SLI. You must define a

> [KeptnMetricsProvider](../yaml-crd-ref/metricsprovider.md) resource

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[KeptnMetricsProvider](../../yaml-crd-ref/metricsprovider.md) resource
```
I think that might fix the xref.

for each instance of each data provider you are using.

> The template will refer to that provider and query it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The template refers to that provider and queries it.
```

An Analysis customizes the templates defined inside an AnalysisDefinition by adding configurations such as:
* a Timeframe that specifies the range for the corresponding query in the AnalysisValueTemplate
* a map of key/value pairs that can be used to substitute placeholders in the AnalysisValueTemplate

An AnalysisDefinition contains a list of objectives to satisfy.
Each of these objectives:
* specifies failure or warning target criteria,
* specifies whether the objective is a key objective (its failure would fail the analysis)
* indicates the weight of the objective on the overall analysis
* refers to an AnalysisValueTemplate that contains the SLIs, defining the data provider from which to gather the data and how to compute the analysis

In each AnalysisValueTemplate we store the query for the analysis of the SLI. You must define a
[KeptnMetricsProvider](../yaml-crd-ref/metricsprovider.md) resource
for each instance of each data provider you are using.
The template refers to that provider and queries it.

Let's consider the following Analysis:

{{< embed path="/metrics-operator/config/samples/metrics_v1alpha3_analysis.yaml" >}}

> This cr sets up the timeframe we are interested in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This CR sets up the timeframe we are interested in
```

> as between 5am and 10am of the 5th of May 2023 ,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
as between 5 am and 10 am on the 5th of May 2023,
```

> and adds a few specific key-value pair that will be substituted in the query

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and adds a few specific key-value pairs that will be substituted in the query
```

> for instance the query could contain a {{.nodename }} and this value will be substituted by test

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For instance, the query could contain a "{{.nodename }}" and this value will be substituted by test
```
or
```suggestion
For instance, the query could contain a `{{.nodename }}` and this value will be substituted by test
```

based on which render better 🤔

Reviewer 3: since in the example later, the query contains the {{.nodename}}, I'd remove the "could"

The definition of this Analysis is referenced by its name and namespace and can be seen here:

{{< embed path="/metrics-operator/config/samples/metrics_v1alpha3_analysisdefinition.yaml" >}}

> This simple definition contains a single objective, response-time-p95. For this objective there are both a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This simple definition contains a single objective, `response-time-p95`. For this objective, there are both
```

---
title: Define SLOs/SLIs with Analyses
description: Understand Analyses in Keptn and how to use them
weight: 91
---

The Keptn Metrics Operator implements an SLO/SLI feature set inspired by Keptn v1 under the name of Analysis.
With an Analysis Definition you can specify multiple Service Level Objectives (SLOs) that will be evaluated in your Analysis.
At the end of the Analysis the status returns whether your objective failed or passed.

The Analysis result is exposed as an OpenTelemetry metric and can be displayed on dashboard tools, such as Grafana.

Keptn v1 users may use converters for
[SLOs](https://github.com/keptn/lifecycle-toolkit/blob/main/metrics-operator/converter/slo_converter.md#slo-converter)
and [SLIs](https://github.com/keptn/lifecycle-toolkit/blob/main/metrics-operator/converter/sli_converter.md#sli-converter)
to migrate towards Keptn Analysis.

## Keptn Analysis basics

A Keptn Analysis is implemented with three resources:

* [Analysis](../../crd-ref/metrics/v1alpha3/#analysis) --
  define the specific configurations and the Analysis to report

> * [AnalysisDefinition](../..crd-ref/metrics/v1alpha3/#analysisdefinition) --

Author: ```suggestion
* [AnalysisDefinition](../../crd-ref/metrics/v1alpha3/#analysisdefinition) --
```

---
title: Analysis
description: Understand Analyses in Keptn and how to use them
weight: 150
cascade:
  type: docs

>   currentversion: main

Reviewer 2: why is this needed?

Author: this is not in fact I will remove it

---

The Keptn Metrics Operator implements an SLO/SLI feature set inspired by Keptn v1 under the name of Analysis.

> With an Analysis Definition you can specify multiple Service Level Objectives that will be evaluated in your Analysis.

Reviewer 2: so that you can make use of the abbreviation nicely afterwards
```suggestion
With an Analysis Definition you can specify multiple Service Level Objectives (SLOs) that will be evaluated in your Analysis.
```

At the end of the Analysis the status returns whether your objective failed or passed.

The Analysis result is exposed as an OpenTelemetry metric and can be displayed on dashboard tools, such as Grafana.

> Keptn v1 users may
> use [SLO](https://github.com/keptn/lifecycle-toolkit/blob/main/metrics-operator/converter/slo_converter.md#slo-converter)
> and [SLI converters](https://github.com/keptn/lifecycle-toolkit/blob/main/metrics-operator/converter/sli_converter.md#sli-converter)
> to migrate towards Keptn Analysis.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Keptn v1 users may use converters for
[SLOs](https://github.com/keptn/lifecycle-toolkit/blob/main/metrics-operator/converter/slo_converter.md#slo-converter)
and [SLIs](https://github.com/keptn/lifecycle-toolkit/blob/main/metrics-operator/converter/sli_converter.md#sli-converter)
to migrate towards Keptn Analysis.
```

## Keptn Analysis basics

A Keptn Analysis is implemented with three resources:

* [Analysis](https://lifecycle.keptn.sh/docs/crd-ref/metrics/v1alpha3/#analysis) --
  define the specific configurations and the analysis to report
* [AnalysisDefinition](https://lifecycle.keptn.sh/docs/crd-ref/metrics/v1alpha3/#analysisdefinition) --

>   define the list of SLOs for an analysis

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  define the list of SLOs for an Analysis
```

* [AnalysisValueTemplate](https://lifecycle.keptn.sh/docs/crd-ref/metrics/v1alpha3/#analysisvaluetemplate) --

>   define the SLI: the KeptnMetricsProvider and the Query to perform for each SLI

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  define the SLI: the KeptnMetricsProvider and the query to perform for each SLI
```

### Define Analysis, Analysis Definition and AnalysisValueTemplate

> An Analysis customizes the templates defined inside an AnalysisDefinition by adding configurations such as:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An Analysis customizes the templates defined inside an AnalysisDefinition by adding configuration such as:
```

> * a Timeframe that specifies the range for the corresponding query in the AnalysisValueTemplate

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* a timeframe that specifies the range for the corresponding query in the AnalysisValueTemplate
```

* a map of key/value pairs that can be used to substitute placeholders in the AnalysisValueTemplate

An AnalysisDefinition contains a list of objectives to satisfy.
Each of these objectives:

> * specifies failure or warning target criteria,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* specifies failure or warning target criteria
```

* specifies whether the objective is a key objective (its failure would fail the analysis)
* indicates the weight of the objective on the overall analysis
* refers to an AnalysisValueTemplate that contains the SLIs, defining the data provider from which to gather the data
  and how to compute the analysis

In each AnalysisValueTemplate we store the query for the analysis of the SLI.
You must define a
[KeptnMetricsProvider](../../yaml-crd-ref/metricsprovider.md) resource
for each instance of each data provider you are using.
The template refers to that provider and queries it.

Let's consider the following Analysis:

{{< embed path="/metrics-operator/config/samples/metrics_v1alpha3_analysis.yaml" >}}

This CR sets up the timeframe we are interested in
as between 5 am and 10 am on the 5th of May 2023,
and adds a few specific key-value pairs that will be substituted in the query.

> For instance, the query could contain a `{{.nodename }}` and this value will be substituted by test

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For instance, the query could contain a `{{ .nodename }}` and this value will be substituted with `test`
```

The definition of this Analysis is referenced by its name and namespace and can be seen here:

{{< embed path="/metrics-operator/config/samples/metrics_v1alpha3_analysisdefinition.yaml" >}}

This simple definition contains a single objective, `response-time-p95`.
For this objective, there are both
failure and warning criteria:

> * objective will fail if the percentile 95 is less than 600

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* the objective will fail if the percentile 95 is less than 600
```

> * there will be a warning in case the value is in between 300 and 500

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* there will be a warning in case the value is between 300 and 500
```

> The total score shows that this analysis should overall score 90% of all objectives to pass or 75 to get a warning.
> Since the objective is one only, this means that we either will pass with 100% (response time is less than 600) or fail
> with 0%(slower response time)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The total score shows that this analysis should have an overall score of 90% to pass or 75% to get a warning.
Since the objective is only one, this means that we either will pass with 100% (response time is less than 600) or fail
with 0% (slower response time).
```

The objective points to the corresponding AnalysisValueTemplate:
{{< embed path="/metrics-operator/config/samples/metrics_v1alpha3_analysisvaluetemplate.yaml" >}}

> This template tell us that we will query a provider called prometheus using this query:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This template tells us that we will query a provider called `prometheus` using this query:
```

```shell
 sum(kube_pod_container_resource_limits{node='{{.nodename}}'}) - sum(kube_node_status_capacity{node='{{.nodename}}'})
```

> at runtime the metrics operator will try to substitute everything in`{{.VariableName }}`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
at runtime the metrics operator will try to substitute everything in`{{.variableName }}`
```

> at runtime the metrics operator will try to substitute everything in`{{.VariableName }}`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At runtime, the metrics operator will try to substitute everything in`{{.VariableName }}`
```

format with a key-value pair in the Analysis resource,
so in this case the query would become:

```shell
 sum(kube_pod_container_resource_limits{node='test'}) - sum(kube_node_status_capacity{node='test'})
```

The other key-value pairs such as 'project' and 'stage' are just examples of how one could pass to the provider

> information similar to old Keptn v1 objectives.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
information similar to Keptn v1 objectives.
```

For a working example you can

> check [here](https://github.com/keptn/lifecycle-toolkit/tree/main/test/testanalysis/analysis-controller-multiple-providers)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
check [here](https://github.com/keptn/lifecycle-toolkit/tree/main/test/testanalysis/analysis-controller-multiple-providers).
```

## Accessing Analysis

### Retrieve KeptnMetric values with kubectl

> Use the `kubectl get` command to retrieve all the `Analysis` in your cluster:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the `kubectl get` command to retrieve all the `Analyses` in your cluster:
```

```shell
kubectl get analyses.metrics.keptn.sh -A

```

This will return something like

```shell
NAMESPACE   NAME              ANALYSISDEFINITION    STATE   WARNING   PASS
default     analysis-sample   ed-my-proj-dev-svc1
```

> You can then describe the analysis like so:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can then describe the analysis with:
```

---
title: Define SLOs/SLIs with Analyses
description: Understand Analyses in Keptn and how to use them
weight: 91
---

The Keptn Metrics Operator implements an SLO/SLI feature set inspired by Keptn v1 under the name of Analysis.
With an Analysis Definition you can specify multiple Service Level Objectives (SLOs) that will be evaluated in your Analysis.
At the end of the Analysis the status returns whether your objective failed or passed.

The Analysis result is exposed as an OpenTelemetry metric and can be displayed on dashboard tools, such as Grafana.

Keptn v1 users may use converters for
[SLOs](https://github.com/keptn/lifecycle-toolkit/blob/main/metrics-operator/converter/slo_converter.md#slo-converter)

> and [SLIs](https://github.com/keptn/lifecycle-toolkit/blob/main/metrics-operator/converter/sli_converter.md#sli-converter)

Reviewer 2: we could use release please comment annotations here and then later, a release tag instead of main branch. same for the other github links in this PR

Author: we agreed with Meg that in a separate pr she  will move those readmes in .md files in the documentation

* [Analysis](https://lifecycle.keptn.sh/docs/crd-ref/metrics/v1alpha3/#analysis) --
  define the specific configurations and the analysis to report
* [AnalysisDefinition](https://lifecycle.keptn.sh/docs/crd-ref/metrics/v1alpha3/#analysisdefinition) --
  define the list of SLOs for an Analysis

> * [AnalysisValueTemplate](https://lifecycle.keptn.sh/docs/crd-ref/metrics/v1alpha3/#analysisvaluetemplate) --

Reviewer 2: please change those links to relative paths

The other key-value pairs such as 'project' and 'stage' are just examples of how one could pass to the provider
information similar to Keptn v1 objectives.
For a working example you can

> check [here](https://github.com/keptn/lifecycle-toolkit/tree/main/test/testAnalysis/analysis-controller-multiple-providers).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
check [here](https://github.com/keptn/lifecycle-toolkit/tree/main/test/testanalysis/analysis-controller-multiple-providers).
```

This will return something like

```shell

> NAMESPACE   NAME              AnalysisDEFINITION    STATE   WARNING   PASS

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NAMESPACE   NAME              ANALYSISDEFINITION    STATE   WARNING   PASS
```
